README.md, before:

# oastools

OpenAPI Specification (OAS) tools for validating, parsing, converting, diffing, joining, and building specs.

[![CI: Go](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/go.yml)
[![CI: golangci-lint](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/golangci-lint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/golangci-lint.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/erraggy/oastools)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/erraggy/oastools)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/erraggy/oastools/graph/badge.svg?token=T8768QXQAX)](https://codecov.io/gh/erraggy/oastools)
[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/erraggy/oastools.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- **Parse** - Parse and analyze OpenAPI specifications (all versions 2.0 through 3.2.0)
- **Validate** - Validate OpenAPI specification files for correctness
- **Convert** - Convert between OpenAPI versions (2.0 ↔ 3.x) with transparent issue tracking
- **Join** - Merge multiple OpenAPI specifications with flexible collision resolution
- **Diff** - Compare OpenAPI specifications and detect breaking changes
- **Generate** - Create idiomatic Go code for API clients and server stubs from OpenAPI specs
- **Build** - Programmatically construct OpenAPI specifications with reflection-based schema generation
- **Library** - Use as a Go library with both simple and advanced APIs

## Installation

### CLI Tool

#### Homebrew (macOS and Linux)

```bash
brew tap erraggy/oastools
brew install oastools
```

To upgrade to the latest version:

```bash
brew upgrade oastools
```

#### Other Methods

```bash
# Using Go
go install github.com/erraggy/oastools/cmd/oastools@latest

# From source
git clone https://github.com/erraggy/oastools.git
cd oastools
make install

# Download pre-built binaries
# Available for macOS (Intel/ARM), Linux (x86_64/ARM64/i386), and Windows (x86_64/i386)
# https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/releases/latest
```

### Go Library

```bash
go get github.com/erraggy/oastools@latest
```

## Quick Start

### Command-Line Interface

```bash
# Validate an OpenAPI spec (from file or URL)
oastools validate openapi.yaml
oastools validate https://example.com/api/openapi.yaml

# Parse and analyze
oastools parse openapi.yaml

# Convert between versions
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.yaml -o openapi.yaml

# Join multiple specs
oastools join -o merged.yaml base.yaml extensions.yaml

# Compare specs and detect breaking changes
oastools diff --breaking api-v1.yaml api-v2.yaml

# Generate Go client and server code
oastools generate --client --server -o ./generated -p api openapi.yaml

# Show all commands
oastools help
```

**CLI Features**:
- **Load from files or URLs** (HTTP/HTTPS) for parse, validate, and convert commands
- Automatic format detection (JSON/YAML)
- Format preservation (JSON input → JSON output, YAML → YAML)
- Detailed validation error messages with spec references
- **Path validation** with REST best practice warnings (trailing slashes, malformed templates)
- External reference resolution (local files only)
- Collision resolution strategies for joining (AcceptLeft, AcceptRight, Error)
- **Code generation** for HTTP clients and server interfaces (client, server, or types-only)

### Library Usage

The library provides two API styles:

#### Simple API (Convenience Functions)

For quick, one-off operations:

```go
import (
    "net/http"

    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/parser"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/validator"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/converter"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/joiner"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/differ"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/generator"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/builder"
)

// Parse
result, err := parser.ParseWithOptions(
    parser.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    parser.WithValidateStructure(true),
)

// Validate
vResult, err := validator.ValidateWithOptions(
    validator.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    validator.WithIncludeWarnings(true),
)

// Convert
cResult, err := converter.ConvertWithOptions(
    converter.WithFilePath("swagger.yaml"),
    converter.WithTargetVersion("3.0.3"),
)

// Join
jResult, err := joiner.JoinWithOptions(
    joiner.WithFilePaths([]string{"base.yaml", "ext.yaml"}),
    joiner.WithConfig(joiner.DefaultConfig()),
)

// Diff
dResult, err := differ.DiffWithOptions(
    differ.WithSourceFilePath("api-v1.yaml"),
    differ.WithTargetFilePath("api-v2.yaml"),
)

// Generate Go code (client, server, or types)
gResult, err := generator.GenerateWithOptions(
    generator.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    generator.WithPackageName("petstore"),
    generator.WithClient(true),
)
if err == nil {
    gResult.WriteFiles("./generated")  // Write generated files
}

// Build (programmatic construction)
type User struct {
    ID   int64  `json:"id" oas:"description=Unique identifier"`
    Name string `json:"name" oas:"minLength=1"`
}

spec := builder.New(parser.OASVersion320).
    SetTitle("User API").
    SetVersion("1.0.0").
    AddOperation(http.MethodGet, "/users",
        builder.WithOperationID("listUsers"),
        builder.WithResponse(http.StatusOK, []User{}),
    )
doc, err := spec.BuildOAS3()  // Returns *parser.OAS3Document
```

#### Advanced API (Reusable Instances)

For processing multiple files with the same configuration:

```go
// Create reusable instances
p := parser.New()
p.ResolveRefs = false
p.ValidateStructure = true

v := validator.New()
v.IncludeWarnings = true

c := converter.New()
c.StrictMode = false

config := joiner.DefaultConfig()
j := joiner.New(config)

d := differ.New()
d.Mode = differ.ModeBreaking

// Process multiple files efficiently
result1, _ := p.Parse("api1.yaml")
result2, _ := p.Parse("api2.yaml")
result3, _ := p.Parse("api3.yaml")

v.ValidateParsed(result1)  // 30x faster than Validate
c.ConvertParsed(result2, "3.0.3")  // 9x faster than Convert
j.JoinParsed([]parser.ParseResult{result1, result2})  // 154x faster than Join
d.DiffParsed(result1, result2)  // Faster than Diff

// Generator processes one spec at a time
gen := generator.New()
gen.PackageName = "myapi"
gen.GenerateClient = true
gen.GenerateServer = true
genResult, _ := gen.Generate("api.yaml")
genResult.WriteFiles("./generated")
```

**Library Features**:
- **Parser**: Parse from files, readers, or bytes; optional reference resolution and structure validation
- **Validator**: Structural, format, and semantic validation; configurable warnings and strict mode
- **Converter**: Convert OAS 2.0 ↔ 3.x with severity-tracked issues (Info, Warning, Critical)
- **Joiner**: Flexible collision strategies, array merging, tag deduplication
- **Differ**: Compare specs with simple or breaking change detection; severity-based classification (Critical, Error, Warning, Info)
- **Generator**: Create idiomatic Go code for HTTP clients, server interfaces, or type-only generation
- **Builder**: Programmatically construct OAS documents with reflection-based schema generation from Go types
- **Performance**: ParseOnce pattern enables efficient workflows (parse once, validate/convert/join/diff many times)

See [pkg.go.dev](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools) for complete API documentation.

## Benchmarks

The library includes comprehensive performance benchmarking (70+ benchmarks across all packages). As of v1.9.1, significant optimizations have been implemented:

**Performance Highlights**:
- **25-32% faster** JSON marshaling (v1.7.0 optimization)
- **29-37% fewer** memory allocations
- **31x faster** validation with `ValidateParsed` vs `Validate` (parse once, validate many)
- **9x faster** conversion with `ConvertParsed` vs `Convert` (parse once, convert many)
- **150x faster** joining with `JoinParsed` vs `Join` (parse once, join many)
- **81x faster** diffing with `DiffParsed` vs `Diff` (parse once, diff many)

**Document Processing Performance** (Apple M4, Go 1.24):

| Operation        | Small (~60 lines) | Medium (~570 lines) | Large (~6000 lines) |
|------------------|-------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Parse            | 138 μs            | 1,119 μs            | 13,880 μs           |
| Validate         | 139 μs            | 1,133 μs            | 14,409 μs           |
| Convert (OAS2→3) | 148 μs            | 1,184 μs            | -                   |
| Join (2 docs)    | 101 μs            | -                   | -                   |
| Diff (2 docs)    | 448 μs            | -                   | -                   |

For detailed performance analysis, methodology, and optimization strategies, see [benchmarks.md](benchmarks.md).

## Supported OpenAPI Versions

All official OpenAPI Specification releases are supported:

| Version   | Specification                                                        |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **2.0**   | [OAS 2.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v2.0.html)                   |
| **3.0.x** | [3.0.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.0.html) - [3.0.4](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.4.html) |
| **3.1.x** | [3.1.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0.html) - [3.1.2](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.2.html) |
| **3.2.0** | [OAS 3.2.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.2.0.html)               |

> **Note:** Release candidate versions (e.g., `3.0.0-rc0`) are detected but not officially supported.

## Format Preservation

When converting or joining, oastools automatically preserves the input file format:

- **JSON input → JSON output**
- **YAML input → YAML output**

This ensures format consistency across your toolchain.

```bash
# JSON file produces JSON output
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.json -o openapi.json

# YAML file produces YAML output
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.yaml -o openapi.yaml

# First file's format determines output (for joining)
oastools join -o merged.json api1.json api2.json
```

## Validation Example

```bash
$ oastools validate testdata/invalid-oas3.yaml
OpenAPI Specification Validator
================================

File: testdata/invalid-oas3.yaml
Version: 3.0.3

Errors (12):
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: missing required field 'info.version': Info object must have a version string per spec
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: invalid path pattern 'paths.items': path must begin with '/'
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: missing required field 'paths.items.get.responses': Operation must have a responses object
  ✗ info.version: Info object must have a version
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#info-object
  ✗ paths.items: Path must start with '/'
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#paths-object
  ...

Warnings (3):
  ⚠ paths.items.post: Operation should have a description or summary for better documentation
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#operation-object
  ...

✗ Validation failed: 12 error(s), 3 warning(s)
```

## Limitations

### External References

- **HTTP(S) References Not Supported**: Only local file references for `$ref` values are supported
- **Security**: External file references are restricted to the base directory and subdirectories to prevent path traversal attacks
- **URL-loaded Specs**: When loading a spec from a URL, relative `$ref` paths resolve against the current directory, not relative to the URL (known limitation)

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24 or higher
- make (optional, but recommended)

### Commands

```bash
# Build and test
make build          # Build binary (output: bin/oastools)
make test           # Run all tests with coverage
make test-coverage  # Generate HTML coverage report

# Code quality
make fmt            # Format code
make lint           # Run golangci-lint
make check          # Run all quality checks (tidy, fmt, lint, test)

# Benchmarks
make bench-parser   # Benchmark parser package
make bench-baseline # Save benchmark baseline

# Other
make clean          # Remove build artifacts
make help           # Show all available commands
```

### Project Structure

```
.
├── cmd/oastools/       # CLI entry point
├── parser/             # OpenAPI parsing library (public API)
├── validator/          # OpenAPI validation library (public API)
├── converter/          # OpenAPI conversion library (public API)
├── joiner/             # OpenAPI joining library (public API)
├── differ/             # OpenAPI diffing library (public API)
├── generator/          # OpenAPI code generation library (public API)
├── builder/            # OpenAPI builder library (public API)
├── internal/           # Internal shared utilities
│   ├── httputil/       # HTTP validation constants
│   ├── severity/       # Severity levels for issues
│   ├── issues/         # Unified issue type
│   └── testutil/       # Test fixtures and helpers
└── testdata/           # Test fixtures and sample specs
```

All seven main packages (parser, validator, converter, joiner, differ, generator, builder) are public and can be imported directly.

## Documentation

- **[Developer Guide](docs/developer-guide.md)** - Comprehensive guide for library and CLI usage
- **[CLI Reference](docs/cli-reference.md)** - Complete command-line reference with examples
- **[Breaking Changes Guide](docs/breaking-changes.md)** - Understanding breaking change semantics
- **[Performance Benchmarks](benchmarks.md)** - Detailed performance analysis
- **[API Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools)** - GoDoc API documentation

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see:

- **[AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md)** - Quick reference guide for AI coding agents (GitHub Copilot, etc.)
- **[WORKFLOW.md](WORKFLOW.md)** - Development workflow from commit to PR to release
- **[CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md)** - Project guidance for Claude Code
- **[CONTRIBUTORS.md](CONTRIBUTORS.md)** - List of contributors

**Quick Start for Contributors:**
1. Read [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md) for quick setup and commands (AI agents start here)
2. Read [WORKFLOW.md](WORKFLOW.md) for the complete development process
3. Run `make check` before committing
4. Follow conventional commit format (e.g., `feat(parser): add feature`)
5. Create detailed pull requests with testing checklist
6. All new exported functionality must have comprehensive tests

## License

MIT

_Note: All code generated by Claude Code using claude-4-5-sonnet with minor edits and full control by [@erraggy](https://github.com/erraggy)_

Commit message:

chore(readme): updates description to match repo description (#86)
Expanded the description to include client/server/type generation.

README.md, after:

# oastools

OpenAPI Specification (OAS) tools for validating, parsing, converting, diffing, joining, and building specs; as well as generating client/servers/types _from_ specs.

[![CI: Go](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/go.yml)
[![CI: golangci-lint](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/golangci-lint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/actions/workflows/golangci-lint.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/erraggy/oastools)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/erraggy/oastools)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/erraggy/oastools/graph/badge.svg?token=T8768QXQAX)](https://codecov.io/gh/erraggy/oastools)
[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/erraggy/oastools.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- **Parse** - Parse and analyze OpenAPI specifications (all versions 2.0 through 3.2.0)
- **Validate** - Validate OpenAPI specification files for correctness
- **Convert** - Convert between OpenAPI versions (2.0 ↔ 3.x) with transparent issue tracking
- **Join** - Merge multiple OpenAPI specifications with flexible collision resolution
- **Diff** - Compare OpenAPI specifications and detect breaking changes
- **Generate** - Create idiomatic Go code for API clients and server stubs from OpenAPI specs
- **Build** - Programmatically construct OpenAPI specifications with reflection-based schema generation
- **Library** - Use as a Go library with both simple and advanced APIs

## Installation

### CLI Tool

#### Homebrew (macOS and Linux)

```bash
brew tap erraggy/oastools
brew install oastools
```

To upgrade to the latest version:

```bash
brew upgrade oastools
```

#### Other Methods

```bash
# Using Go
go install github.com/erraggy/oastools/cmd/oastools@latest

# From source
git clone https://github.com/erraggy/oastools.git
cd oastools
make install

# Download pre-built binaries
# Available for macOS (Intel/ARM), Linux (x86_64/ARM64/i386), and Windows (x86_64/i386)
# https://github.com/erraggy/oastools/releases/latest
```

### Go Library

```bash
go get github.com/erraggy/oastools@latest
```

## Quick Start

### Command-Line Interface

```bash
# Validate an OpenAPI spec (from file or URL)
oastools validate openapi.yaml
oastools validate https://example.com/api/openapi.yaml

# Parse and analyze
oastools parse openapi.yaml

# Convert between versions
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.yaml -o openapi.yaml

# Join multiple specs
oastools join -o merged.yaml base.yaml extensions.yaml

# Compare specs and detect breaking changes
oastools diff --breaking api-v1.yaml api-v2.yaml

# Generate Go client and server code
oastools generate --client --server -o ./generated -p api openapi.yaml

# Show all commands
oastools help
```

**CLI Features**:
- **Load from files or URLs** (HTTP/HTTPS) for parse, validate, and convert commands
- Automatic format detection (JSON/YAML)
- Format preservation (JSON input → JSON output, YAML → YAML)
- Detailed validation error messages with spec references
- **Path validation** with REST best practice warnings (trailing slashes, malformed templates)
- External reference resolution (local files only)
- Collision resolution strategies for joining (AcceptLeft, AcceptRight, Error)
- **Code generation** for HTTP clients and server interfaces (client, server, or types-only)

### Library Usage

The library provides two API styles:

#### Simple API (Convenience Functions)

For quick, one-off operations:

```go
import (
    "net/http"

    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/parser"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/validator"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/converter"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/joiner"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/differ"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/generator"
    "github.com/erraggy/oastools/builder"
)

// Parse
result, err := parser.ParseWithOptions(
    parser.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    parser.WithValidateStructure(true),
)

// Validate
vResult, err := validator.ValidateWithOptions(
    validator.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    validator.WithIncludeWarnings(true),
)

// Convert
cResult, err := converter.ConvertWithOptions(
    converter.WithFilePath("swagger.yaml"),
    converter.WithTargetVersion("3.0.3"),
)

// Join
jResult, err := joiner.JoinWithOptions(
    joiner.WithFilePaths([]string{"base.yaml", "ext.yaml"}),
    joiner.WithConfig(joiner.DefaultConfig()),
)

// Diff
dResult, err := differ.DiffWithOptions(
    differ.WithSourceFilePath("api-v1.yaml"),
    differ.WithTargetFilePath("api-v2.yaml"),
)

// Generate Go code (client, server, or types)
gResult, err := generator.GenerateWithOptions(
    generator.WithFilePath("openapi.yaml"),
    generator.WithPackageName("petstore"),
    generator.WithClient(true),
)
if err == nil {
    gResult.WriteFiles("./generated")  // Write generated files
}

// Build (programmatic construction)
type User struct {
    ID   int64  `json:"id" oas:"description=Unique identifier"`
    Name string `json:"name" oas:"minLength=1"`
}

spec := builder.New(parser.OASVersion320).
    SetTitle("User API").
    SetVersion("1.0.0").
    AddOperation(http.MethodGet, "/users",
        builder.WithOperationID("listUsers"),
        builder.WithResponse(http.StatusOK, []User{}),
    )
doc, err := spec.BuildOAS3()  // Returns *parser.OAS3Document
```

#### Advanced API (Reusable Instances)

For processing multiple files with the same configuration:

```go
// Create reusable instances
p := parser.New()
p.ResolveRefs = false
p.ValidateStructure = true

v := validator.New()
v.IncludeWarnings = true

c := converter.New()
c.StrictMode = false

config := joiner.DefaultConfig()
j := joiner.New(config)

d := differ.New()
d.Mode = differ.ModeBreaking

// Process multiple files efficiently
result1, _ := p.Parse("api1.yaml")
result2, _ := p.Parse("api2.yaml")
result3, _ := p.Parse("api3.yaml")

v.ValidateParsed(result1)  // 30x faster than Validate
c.ConvertParsed(result2, "3.0.3")  // 9x faster than Convert
j.JoinParsed([]parser.ParseResult{result1, result2})  // 154x faster than Join
d.DiffParsed(result1, result2)  // Faster than Diff

// Generator processes one spec at a time
gen := generator.New()
gen.PackageName = "myapi"
gen.GenerateClient = true
gen.GenerateServer = true
genResult, _ := gen.Generate("api.yaml")
genResult.WriteFiles("./generated")
```

**Library Features**:
- **Parser**: Parse from files, readers, or bytes; optional reference resolution and structure validation
- **Validator**: Structural, format, and semantic validation; configurable warnings and strict mode
- **Converter**: Convert OAS 2.0 ↔ 3.x with severity-tracked issues (Info, Warning, Critical)
- **Joiner**: Flexible collision strategies, array merging, tag deduplication
- **Differ**: Compare specs with simple or breaking change detection; severity-based classification (Critical, Error, Warning, Info)
- **Generator**: Create idiomatic Go code for HTTP clients, server interfaces, or type-only generation
- **Builder**: Programmatically construct OAS documents with reflection-based schema generation from Go types
- **Performance**: ParseOnce pattern enables efficient workflows (parse once, validate/convert/join/diff many times)

See [pkg.go.dev](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools) for complete API documentation.

## Benchmarks

The library includes comprehensive performance benchmarking (70+ benchmarks across all packages). As of v1.9.1, significant optimizations have been implemented:

**Performance Highlights**:
- **25-32% faster** JSON marshaling (v1.7.0 optimization)
- **29-37% fewer** memory allocations
- **31x faster** validation with `ValidateParsed` vs `Validate` (parse once, validate many)
- **9x faster** conversion with `ConvertParsed` vs `Convert` (parse once, convert many)
- **150x faster** joining with `JoinParsed` vs `Join` (parse once, join many)
- **81x faster** diffing with `DiffParsed` vs `Diff` (parse once, diff many)

**Document Processing Performance** (Apple M4, Go 1.24):

| Operation        | Small (~60 lines) | Medium (~570 lines) | Large (~6000 lines) |
|------------------|-------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Parse            | 138 μs            | 1,119 μs            | 13,880 μs           |
| Validate         | 139 μs            | 1,133 μs            | 14,409 μs           |
| Convert (OAS2→3) | 148 μs            | 1,184 μs            | -                   |
| Join (2 docs)    | 101 μs            | -                   | -                   |
| Diff (2 docs)    | 448 μs            | -                   | -                   |

For detailed performance analysis, methodology, and optimization strategies, see [benchmarks.md](benchmarks.md).

## Supported OpenAPI Versions

All official OpenAPI Specification releases are supported:

| Version   | Specification                                                        |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **2.0**   | [OAS 2.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v2.0.html)                   |
| **3.0.x** | [3.0.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.0.html) - [3.0.4](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.4.html) |
| **3.1.x** | [3.1.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0.html) - [3.1.2](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.2.html) |
| **3.2.0** | [OAS 3.2.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.2.0.html)               |

> **Note:** Release candidate versions (e.g., `3.0.0-rc0`) are detected but not officially supported.

## Format Preservation

When converting or joining, oastools automatically preserves the input file format:

- **JSON input → JSON output**
- **YAML input → YAML output**

This ensures format consistency across your toolchain.

```bash
# JSON file produces JSON output
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.json -o openapi.json

# YAML file produces YAML output
oastools convert -t 3.0.3 swagger.yaml -o openapi.yaml

# First file's format determines output (for joining)
oastools join -o merged.json api1.json api2.json
```

## Validation Example

```bash
$ oastools validate testdata/invalid-oas3.yaml
OpenAPI Specification Validator
================================

File: testdata/invalid-oas3.yaml
Version: 3.0.3

Errors (12):
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: missing required field 'info.version': Info object must have a version string per spec
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: invalid path pattern 'paths.items': path must begin with '/'
  ✗ document: oas 3.0.3: missing required field 'paths.items.get.responses': Operation must have a responses object
  ✗ info.version: Info object must have a version
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#info-object
  ✗ paths.items: Path must start with '/'
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#paths-object
  ...

Warnings (3):
  ⚠ paths.items.post: Operation should have a description or summary for better documentation
    Spec: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3.html#operation-object
  ...

✗ Validation failed: 12 error(s), 3 warning(s)
```

## Limitations

### External References

- **HTTP(S) References Not Supported**: Only local file references for `$ref` values are supported
- **Security**: External file references are restricted to the base directory and subdirectories to prevent path traversal attacks
- **URL-loaded Specs**: When loading a spec from a URL, relative `$ref` paths resolve against the current directory, not relative to the URL (known limitation)

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24 or higher
- make (optional, but recommended)

### Commands

```bash
# Build and test
make build          # Build binary (output: bin/oastools)
make test           # Run all tests with coverage
make test-coverage  # Generate HTML coverage report

# Code quality
make fmt            # Format code
make lint           # Run golangci-lint
make check          # Run all quality checks (tidy, fmt, lint, test)

# Benchmarks
make bench-parser   # Benchmark parser package
make bench-baseline # Save benchmark baseline

# Other
make clean          # Remove build artifacts
make help           # Show all available commands
```

### Project Structure

```
.
├── cmd/oastools/       # CLI entry point
├── parser/             # OpenAPI parsing library (public API)
├── validator/          # OpenAPI validation library (public API)
├── converter/          # OpenAPI conversion library (public API)
├── joiner/             # OpenAPI joining library (public API)
├── differ/             # OpenAPI diffing library (public API)
├── generator/          # OpenAPI code generation library (public API)
├── builder/            # OpenAPI builder library (public API)
├── internal/           # Internal shared utilities
│   ├── httputil/       # HTTP validation constants
│   ├── severity/       # Severity levels for issues
│   ├── issues/         # Unified issue type
│   └── testutil/       # Test fixtures and helpers
└── testdata/           # Test fixtures and sample specs
```

All seven main packages (parser, validator, converter, joiner, differ, generator, builder) are public and can be imported directly.

## Documentation

- **[Developer Guide](docs/developer-guide.md)** - Comprehensive guide for library and CLI usage
- **[CLI Reference](docs/cli-reference.md)** - Complete command-line reference with examples
- **[Breaking Changes Guide](docs/breaking-changes.md)** - Understanding breaking change semantics
- **[Performance Benchmarks](benchmarks.md)** - Detailed performance analysis
- **[API Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/erraggy/oastools)** - GoDoc API documentation

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see:

- **[AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md)** - Quick reference guide for AI coding agents (GitHub Copilot, etc.)
- **[WORKFLOW.md](WORKFLOW.md)** - Development workflow from commit to PR to release
- **[CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md)** - Project guidance for Claude Code
- **[CONTRIBUTORS.md](CONTRIBUTORS.md)** - List of contributors

**Quick Start for Contributors:**
1. Read [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md) for quick setup and commands (AI agents start here)
2. Read [WORKFLOW.md](WORKFLOW.md) for the complete development process
3. Run `make check` before committing
4. Follow conventional commit format (e.g., `feat(parser): add feature`)
5. Create detailed pull requests with testing checklist
6. All new exported functionality must have comprehensive tests

## License

MIT

_Note: All code generated by Claude Code using claude-4-5-sonnet with minor edits and full control by [@erraggy](https://github.com/erraggy)_
